---
layout: post
title: Chapter 4
permalink: /2007/08/chapter-4/
---

Enough of the heavy stuff, let's get on with the story. Over the hump of
Chapters 1-4. Late but picking up stride.

> The bus continued down the road and eventually onto a bumpy highway. Between
> the hum of the wheels in the back of the bus and the grain of the road shaking
> his seat, Web began fighting to keep his eyes open, and before he knew it..
> 
> "Excuse me," said a frail, old voice, its owner tapping him softly on the
> shoulder.
> 
> Web opened his eyes, momentarily confused about where he was. He looked with
> the distant gaze of interrupted sleep at the elderly woman who was sitting next
> to him.
> 
> "I'm sorry to wake you. Your head was getting heavy on my shoulder. And you
> were drooling on my shawl."
> 
> Web blinked and felt the conscious world returning to him. He hadn't even seen
> the woman get on.
> 
> "I'm terribly sorry," he said suddenly as the ability to speak clicked in,
> "it's been a long week. I'll try my best to use the window." And then, to try
> to win some points with the old woman, "I'm the World Wide Web, you know."
> 
> "That's nice," she smiled, "I thought you looked like a Jeffrey."
> 
> Web gazed out at the road passing by and thought of his week at the retreat.
> Everything had been so regimented, yet it all seemed to work together smoothly.
> The more he learned how to fall into their pattern of going about things, the
> less he found himself distracted by the day-to-day worries that once kept him
> busy.
> 
> It was still a ways before Web's stop -- a protest down in the Big City.  The
> members at his new camp said they were were pleased at how well he understood
> their beliefs, and they wanted him to be their representation at the event.
> URLs were gathering to protest for equal rights, it seemed, right under the
> marquee at Application Square. He job was to attend the protest and attempt to
> identify and arrange a meeting with the leaders of each respective group at the
> protest. Web still wasn't sure what to do after that, but his new friends had
> assured him that the rest would take care of itself.
