---
layout: post
title: The Irony of Wikileaks
permalink: /2010/03/the-irony-of-wikileaks/
---

It’s been an interesting year for WikiLeaks. Having broken a number of
important stories, they’re famous enough now that people outside the internet
community have a chance at knowing who they are. But they’ve also had problems.
They’ve shut down the site for a significant fundraising goal, and now,
according to their [twitter feed](http://twitter.com/wikileaks/), they’re being
[pursued by the US Government](http://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/10961072669)
for preparing to leak a murder video in which Uncle Sam is allegedly caught
  with the smoking gun.

First I want to acknowledge that a site like WikiLeaks is treading on grey
territory by its very definition. There is a fine line between classified
information and whistleblower-worthy information. While the ideological goal of
WikiLeaks — to provide the world’s first truly free press — is noble, there is
also a reason why organizations, like individuals, need privacy. Publishing the
details of banking negotiations between Iceland and Britain, for example,
doesn’t seem very noble to me. No more noble than if I published messy divorce
proceedings I found in a neighbor’s trash can. But there have also been many
instances where WikiLeaks has fearlessly exposed wrongdoing that would have
otherwise been covered up.
 
Jumping over the philosophical argument though, the recent events concerning
WikiLeaks got me thinking: how could we design a better WikiLeaks that is
resistant to the problems it currently has? Namely, a WikiLeaks that 1) doesn’t
need fundraising, and 2) can’t be shot by angry spies. What if WikiLeaks was a
sort of Wiki-BitTorrent, served by thousands of people around the world running
a background process on their computers. No fundraising needed here, it’s all
P2P. And if the Wiki is maintained WikiPedia style, then we no longer need to
pay for a centralized staff to curate it. Plus, there’s no centralized staff to
kill or jail. It can be a decentralized, collaborative process.

And then I realized the irony. What if this experiment in citizen’s power is
successful precisely because it is a dictatorship? 

If WikiLeaks was P2P, then it could be attacked — poisoned at the
infrastructural level by the governments and corporations that do not want to
see it succeed. Even worse, a P2P WikiLeaks could be left standing, but its
content could be poisoned with fake and misleading files. Sort of how the RIAA
uploads music files to file-sharing networks that actually just contain 3
minutes of silence. With the signal-to-noise ration low enough, the whole
operation would be discredited, and the site would essentially be useless. Even
if such information-poisoning wasn’t known by the public, how could anyone
  trust an anonymously curated site to provide reliable truth on such secretive
  subjects? 

It seems a single point of control  — the editor — might be necessary for
WikiLeaks to succeed, because we need a way to know whether to trust the
explosive documents it publishes. If only we could place our absolute trust in
an editor, then we can be assured of the veracity of the leaked documents. 

And that makes WikiLeaks just as old fashioned as it is revolutionary.
