---
layout: post
title: Facebook&#39;s Product is You
permalink: /2010/05/facebooks-product-is-you/
---

Much of the debate about Facebook's new policies is missing another large
issue. So far, the focus has been on privacy: essentially how to draw the messy
line between public and private in the socially networked age. Just as
important as where that line falls, however, is who owns the rights to use and
redistribute the information artifacts left behind by your digital presence.
 
Here's an example from the offline world: I wrote a book for a publisher who
likes to put author photos on the front cover, and so I was required to grant
them the rights to my image. Two years later, I was walking through a book
store and saw my picture on a combo-pack of books that I didn't even know
existed. That was weird, but it was what I was explicitly told to expect when I
signed my contact. I'm now a co-owner of my own image, but I got paid to share
and I have a contract filed away. I can live with that.  
 
Here's the question, though: what about that photo of you holding two beers and
wearing a cowboy hat? Or the fact that you once listed "AIDS" as your
relationship status, even though you quickly changed it. Facebook's database
remembers. What about your religion ("Christian - Other") or your interests
("acoustic rock, avocados, unicycling") and the fact that three years ago your
religion was something else ("Wiccan"). What about the fact that you keep
looking at Christy's beach pictures over and over -- Facebook's database now
shows 42 times in a month -- or that you are a member of the "Yes We Can!"
group?
 
Forget about the privacy question for a moment, and put on your green
accountant's visor. Let's talk about you, the product. 
 
Every piece of information and every mouse click you make online is product. It
is the product the modern web is making its money off of. Oo Nwoye hit the nail
on the head when he put it [this
way](http://oonwoye.com/blog/2010/05/18/facebook-letter/): "On Facebook, the
users are the products while the advertisers are the customers." The question
is, where's your contract? How much agency do you have over the distribution of
this product, and what do you get out of the bargain?
 
Thinking about it this way is important, because if you divide people into two
groups, based on their privacy stance, I think you end up with two very
different answers to the "Facebook problem": 

*    If you are not OK with your information being sold, would you be willing to pay a monthly fee to have Facebook access but be guaranteed your information wasn't provided to third-parties? Facebook has to generate revenue to pay for the services they're providing you, and if they can't sell your personal information, you're going to have to cough up a subscription fee. (As an aside, danah boyd has a great [article](http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/05/15/facebook-is-a-utility-utilities-get-regulated.html) about social networking as a public utility, addressing the "I don't approve, but can't cancel my account" problem).

*   If you are OK with your information being sold, why are you letting someone else make all the money off of you? Why not sell it yourself? For those people who really don't care if corporations know that you are the founding member of the "Soccer is for Sissies" group,  then why shouldn't you be the one to profit from that? Either sign a profit-sharing contract with Facebook or act as your own free agent. There is a huge market opportunity here: create a browser plugin that offers your personal data to every web page you visit. You have an asking price (say, 5 cents per page) and they have an offer. If their offer meets your asking price, you send them your personal data. Triple your asking price and you sell them your entire social history as well.

Here's my point: the privacy debate is real and important, but in order to
tackle the societal challenges that the social networking era is throwing at
us, we also need to start having a conversation that addresses the marketplace
for our personal information. We are the products of this marketplace, every
  one of us, but I get the impression that we would rather pretend otherwise
  because it sounds bad to say it that way. Unless we acknowledge this bizarre
  new world, I fear we won't build a legal infrastructure around it that gives
  us the individual agency we deserve.

