---
layout: post
title: "Things Exploding in Academia"
permalink: /2014/05/things-exploding-in-academia
published: false
tags:
- "writing"
- "academia"
- "natural language processing"
js: "table-sort.js"
---

Peer-reviewed academic papers follow a relatively rigid writing pattern. The first few paragraphs of a paper have a tough task to accomplish: they must call attention to some important trend or phenomenon, identify a related unsolved problem, explain why it is hard, and then introduce the intuition for a solution upon which the rest of the paper relies.

But there are only so many ways you stress the import of some phenomenon in just a sentence or two. And, let's face it, there also aren't that many J.K. Rowlings hiding out in the laboratories of the world using scientific papers introductions as their creative outlet. (Michael Chrichton )

Enter the word **exploding**.

When academics want to tell people something is **really important**, many will say it is exploding. That's the code word for ``we all know this is an important topic to study, but I don't feel like looking up statistics to prove it.'' It's all over if you look for it: just read the first four sentences of a paper.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>I think I read two papers today that used the phrase &quot;explosion of data&quot; in their first sentence.</p>&mdash; Michael Bernstein (@msbernst) <a href="https://twitter.com/msbernst/statuses/466425208019353600">May 14, 2014</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

In my view, which always errs---for safety---toward intentional misinterpretation, this is major unreported story coming from the halls of science. Things are exploding all around us. Scientists are trying to tell us about it, and the mainstream media is ignoring them!

To shed light on this important explosion problem, I scraped 5000 papers from Google Scholar this morning with the phrases "is exploding", "are exploding", "will explode", "exploded", or "has exploded".

So, with good humor toward the upstanding scientists I'm victimizing, here it is, the real threat vector, straight from peer reviewed literature:

## Things that are Exploding

<table class="tablesorter">
  <thead>
    <tr>Count</tr>
    <tr>Percentage</tr>
    <tr>Thing that is Exploding</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
