---
layout: post
title: Launching is an Accountability Hack
permalink: /2015/11/launching-is-an-accountability-hack
published: true
tags:
  - Thoughts
  - Cloudstitch
---

When you’re building something new, it’s tempting to succumb to that feeling of
“just a little bit more work.. then we’ll launch it.” Launch is always right
around the corner, just as soon as you iron out a few more kinks.

The dangerous problem with this mindset is that there will always be kinks to
iron out, but you don’t know which ones are important until real customers are
in the loop. Paradoxically, delaying a launch in pursuit of perfectionism is the
very thing preventing you from achieving it.

I felt that “let’s wait a few more weeks” feeling a lot at the beginning of
[Cloudstitch](http://www.cloudstitch.com/). We began a small private beta in
December 2014, and for half a year we remained in that state. When we got into
YCombinator, we decided launch had to be now or never, and the coding that
happened in the three weeks that followed was revelatory. We started running
daily QA sessions to weed out bugs, and it became immediately clear that half
our features had to be deleted. They were either too buggy or too confusing. We
removed a lot of fancy reactive syncing, shrunk the UX down to a minimum, and
took away almost all configuration options. The only new feature we added was a
way to pay us.

Now we’re back to adding new interesting features, but they aren’t the ones we
were working on before. Now we wake up to emails from customers that guide our
product planning. And that doesn’t mean we’re doing everything right, but it
does, I think, mean we’re doing things for a better set of reasons. That’s a
much better spot to be in.

So if you’ve got launch anxiety, don’t think about your launch as a debutante
ball where you’ve got to impress the whole industry. Forget your perfectionist
nerves. Launch is an accountability hack. It’s a bottlenecking process that
forces you to strip your idea down to the essentials, make it work well enough
to find real users, and then build it back up with their feedback.

That feeling of “we’re ready” will never come if you keep delaying a launch.
You’ve got to slowly grow into it by iterating with your users. And here’s the
best part: you can probably start doing that immediately.
