---
layout: post
title: D3 in a Box is Docker for Visualizations
permalink: /2015/10/d3-in-a-box-is-docker-for-visualizations
published: true
tags:
  - Hacks
  - Cloudstitch
---

Cloudstitch launched a new product called [D3 in a
Box](http://www.cloudstitch.com/d3-in-a-box) this week, and I wanted to write a
few notes about the motivation behind it. It’s one of those “what we found is
not what we expected” stories.

D3 in a Box is like a [docker container](https://www.docker.com/what-docker) for
a [D3 visualization](http://d3js.org/): it bundles up everything you need to
make and manage a production-quality graphic. Just keep your data in a Google
Spreadsheet and manage your code Cloudstitch’s cloud-based editor, and we take
care of all the magic to deploy it, scale it, and clone it as many times as you
like.

In fact, the best way to get started is to [clone an existing
visualization](http://www.cloudstitch.com/d3-in-a-box) and modify it. Here are
some examples from our starter-project gallery:

<span class="figcaption_hack">Just click clone and you get your own container filled with everything you need
for a production-scale visualization.</span>

When we started building D3 in a Box, we didn’t realize project management and
deployment was a useful feature for visualizations. Our original idea was to
adapt D3 visualizations so that non-coders could customize everything about them
with a spreadsheet.

We won a [Prototype
Grant](http://knightfoundation.org/funding-initiatives/knight-prototype-fund/)
from the [Knight Foundation](http://knightfoundation.org/) to work on
spreadsheet-powered news apps. We built a number of evergreen visualizations,
like electoral maps and sports brackets. And we enabled all sorts of elaborate
spreadsheet-based control panels to modify their look and feel. Here’s just one
worksheet of settings from a map widget:

<span class="figcaption_hack">D3 in a Box was initially aimed at making D3 widgets hyper-customizable with
spreadsheets.</span>

But the more we visited newsrooms and chatted with developers, the more we
realized this was missing the mark. All the visualizations we encountered fell
into roughly one of two categories. Standard go-tos like maps and scatterplots
all had slick custom products built up around them, like
[MapBox](http://www.mapbox.com/) or [Tableau](http://www.tableau.com/), so why
use a spreadsheet? The other half were so custom and story-specific that
programming, not pre-set spreadsheet options, was the better level of
abstraction.

But while we were getting schooled in newsroom programming, we noticed something
that was in dire need of improvement: visualization workflow involves a lot of
overhead. You’ve got to manage data gathering, archive code, support reuse,
train non-coders, host the darn thing, and often wrestle with an uncooperative
CMS. One newsroom developer showed me all the custom apps he had built just to
crowdsource data collection across the newsroom. Another showed me a computer
under the desk with a post-it note that said “DO NOT TURN OFF.” It hosted all
the paper’s visualizations separately from machine running the CMS. And all this
is time that’s not being spent on the actual story.

So that’s what D3 in a Box fixes: all the overhead work you’d rather ignore so
you can get back to telling your visual story.

Just like the Docker folks realized that there’s great value in packaging and
encapsulating server configurations, we think that makes a lot of sense for
visualizations. D3 in a Box visualizations are self-contained, full-stack
bundles that just work. If you’ve been spending time writing data collection
app, just mail out a link your D3 Box’s Google Sheet instead. If you’re hosting
visualizations on a dusty machine under your desk, we’ll take the baton for you.
If your CMS is a grump, we integrate with it anyway.

Here’s a short video tour of cloning and editing a Box:

<span class="figcaption_hack">Video tour of cloning and editing a D3 in a Box visualization.</span>

Let us know what** **you think about this model — we’d really like to be of
service to the all the newsrooms out there. Feel free to leave a comment on this
post or shoot me a note at ted@cloudstitch.com.

* [Data Visualization](https://medium.com/tag/data-visualization?source=post)
* [D3](https://medium.com/tag/d3?source=post)
* [Cloudstitch](https://medium.com/tag/cloudstitch?source=post)

By clapping more or less, you can signal to us which stories really stand out.
