---
layout: post
title: Eating Startup Dogfood in Public
permalink: /2016/03/eating-startup-dogfood-in-public
published: true
tags:
  - Thoughts
  - Cloudstitch
---

[Eating your own
dogfood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food) is a tech term
believed to have started in the early days of Microsoft. By becoming your own
customer, you really feel, not just intellectualize, the bugs and shortcomings
of your product. Google famously banned MS Office as a way to get Google Docs up
to speed. GitHub “[uses GitHub to build
GitHub](https://zachholman.com/talk/how-github-uses-github-to-build-github/)”.
And so on.

[Cloudstitch](http://www.cloudstitch.com/) is building the world’s first
prosumer web development platform. We’ve got a clever development stack that we
think is the key to unlocking this: your office suite (spreadsheets, folders,
etc) instead of the traditional mess of databases and app servers programmers
are used to. But a clever development stack is not enough: the experience has to
be good, too.

Last November I grew worried that I was getting too out of touch with our users.
I realized that when I built things using Cloudstitch (for friends, client
demos, etc), I was increasingly using private tricks to bypass our cloud editing
interface instead of using our platform the way our users do.

That had to change, so I did a series of experiments. I sat down and recorded
myself re-writing a few people’s websites using Cloudstitch. I recorded them
from scratch, with zero preparation, in a single take, without re-dos.

In just three videos, I learned a lot about what works and what *needs* work.
Software demos tend to be scripted to create a feeling of effortlessness. But in
real world development, situations arise that don’t perfectly match the tools
you happen to be holding. Suddenly you need to find a workaround. There is
something amazing about being recorded while you take those detours on your own
product.

So here they are. Three short videos that I think are actually pretty useful
tutorials given the setup of the experiment. But the real reason I wanted to
share them was the hope it might inspire other startup founders to do this
exercise. Even if you never release the results (I wasn’t sure if I would), try
hitting the record button on yourself while you become your own user. You’ll be
glad you did.

**Walter Lasecki’s Publication Page**

<span class="figcaption_hack">Drive by Web Programming — Walter Lasecki Edition</span>

**Elena Glassman’s Publication Page**

<span class="figcaption_hack">Drive by Web Programming — Elena Glassman Edition</span>

**Frank Wang’s Publication Page**

<span class="figcaption_hack">Drive by Web Programming — Frank Wang Edition</span>
