---
layout: post
title: On Disposable Software
permalink: /2016/04/on-disposable-software
published: true
tags:
  - Thoughts
  - Cloudstitch
---

Think of how freely you doodle on a whiteboard versus how carefully you typeset
your thesis. How fluidly we hack spreadsheets versus how cautiously we plan
databases. How quickly we sketch a UI on paper versus how slowly we build it as
software.

The word “disposable” often has negative connotations, but disposability is an
amazing property when you can achieve it. When a product or process is
disposable, we gain a kind of creative liberation. We no longer have to spend
energy maintaining the means and instead can focus entirely on the ends. And if
the ends don’t work, we just toss everything and do it again.

Most software creation is far from disposable. In fact the engineering tradition
trains us to strive for the opposite. We dedicate extraordinary time toward
generalized, scalable, custom-smithed designs. Then we build and deploy them
with tooling that cements them in place for years.

This approach works well for enormous tech products, but at what cost to the
rest of the world? Most web sites, for example, are little more than attractive
wrappers around a dataset. Yet we build them with the same industrial tooling
that Facebook and Google use at scale (React, Angular, Kubernetes, etc).

It’s like Monty Python hunting mosquitos with bazookas. As a programmer, where’s
my fly swatter?

<span class="figcaption_hack">Frameworks like React and Ruby on Rails are bazookas, while most websites are
mosquitos. Besides comedic value, why use a bazooka to kill a mosquito?</span>

There’s a great legacy of dreaming about computers as effortless extensions of
the mind. Engelbart saw them as humanity’s way of [getting better at getting
better](http://www.dougengelbart.org/about/bootstrapping.html). Jobs had his
[bicycle for the mind](https://youtu.be/ob_GX50Za6c) analogy. Victor has a great
thread of thought on [humane computing](https://vimeo.com/115154289).

As an engineer, I’d like my computer to be an effortless extension of my hand,
too. If we could create software at a speed and cost deserving of the term
disposable, just think of the creative forces we would unlock.
